---
layout:     post
title:      2020
date:       2019-12-28 19:00:00 +0100
categories: linux
tags:       new year, plans, goals
---

Topics for 2020.

<!--more-->

## Security topics
- what is security research? how to get into it?
- hackthebox.eu
- overthewire.org

## Operating Systems
- on the right track! dig deeper into the Linux kernel

## Networks
- gain a deeper understanding of protocols
	- TCP / UDP
	- IP

## Cryptography & PKI
- finally learn how all the parts fit together

## Programming languages
- get more into Go and C++
- keep learning about ML type languages (OCaml, Haskell)
- get started with LLVM

## Concurrency
- learn basics of concurrent / parallel programming
	- what is Erlang doing on this front?
	- threads
	- Go's channels

## Machine learning
- get back to learning the basics

## Hobby project
- should be a game

## Life plans
- start learning about woodworking, start using my father's tools
- get a glider plance licence by next summer/fall (2020)
- grow some plants from the seeds we have gathered with Szilvi
- get a car, we really need one in the new apartment
- travel, visit family more often!

## `2019_plans.md`
I just noticed this poor file that was lying among my drafts.
I started writing it at the end of 2018 ((exactly 1 year before I wrote this post)
then I forgot about it. It contained the following:
- read "the morning paper" regularly
- join a software community and be active: Handmade network?
- start working on a different open source project every month (?)
    - might start with this: https://github.com/ryanfleury/plane_crawler
- build international relations
    - US
- watch these interviews: https://handmadedev.show
