---
layout: post
title:  "rm, file permissions and recovering data"
date:   2019-10-26 19:00:00 +0100
categories: linux
tags: rm delete
---

I won't find the `rm -rf` jokes that funny anymore. Yesterday as I was testing a deployment bash script
on my laptop, I set some environment variables and run a script that executed `rm -rf $STARTUP_ENV_DIR`.
That variable was accidentally set to `~/`. In a fraction of a second, some strange "Permission denied" error
messages appeared (to which I'll get back later in this post) and in a few seconds it began to sink in:
I deleted all my music, pictures, work files, almost everything I had in `/home/asallai`.
My heartrate increased, I started to sweat and I just
sat there looking at the screen not understanding how it could happen to me. Never before have I done anything like it.
I couldn't even imagine someone accidentally doing it. You'd have to be so stupid and careless I thought!
How could someone ever type `rm -rf ~/`? As it turns out, I never had to type that in, the script used a variable for the path.
I accidentally left off a subdirectory from the end of the $STARTUP_ENV_DIR variable. That was it.

Most file systems of today don't delete the actual data in a file when you delete it. They only remove the references
to the blocks of the data on the disk to make the process faster. After the blocks are "unlinked", the filesystem sees that
space as "empty" and it reports it to you as free space where you can write new data. 
But if you bypass the filesystem and read the raw blocks from the disk with a special program, you can still
find the old file data intact as long as something else was not written to the place where it was.
So I immediately started googling for recovery solutions.

I found `testdisk` and eventually its extension `photorec` from [cgsecurity][cgsec]. It seems to be able to recover a lot of file types. One however is listed on their website as a supported format, yet it couldn't
reconstruct them: `.mp3` files.
Even though `photorec` claimed to have found them, it created 2,1 kB sized mp3 files during the recovery process,
none of which seemed to be reconstructed properly. I have to do more research on this topic to understand why this happened
but in the end I was unfortunately unable to get my lost music back. Sad.

Also, source code, as it is just plain text can't be properly reconstructed because there is no metadata whatsoever within
the contents of the file. The first few runs of the recovery I tried created an incredible amount of `.txt` files which 
contained various bits of source code in c or java or python, but the tool could neither reconstruct the original file name, neither the extension so the results were unusable.

Information about the deleted directory hierarchy is also missing so what you get at the end of the recovery is a giant pile of
randomly named files next to each other without any order (`photorec` dumps them in numbered directories but that doesn' help either.)

[cgsec]: https://www.cgsecurity.org

To be honest, it is not such a tragedy, as I keep the most important things on my desktop PC and some of it even in the
cloud but still, I just lost a significant amount of really valuable data. It was a really strange night.
I felt like some of my memories have been deleted. It's strange how much our data means to us these days.

But there usually is a bright side. In this case it was that I learned a lot in the process.
The most important bit is finally understanding how `rm` works, which I want to share with you.

_To be clear, the script ran as my normal user, not with sudo_

So in order to delete files in a Linux based system
(with regards to the the file permissions and ignoring other security mechanisms like MAC and whatnot) you have to have
write permissions **on the direct parent directory** of the file (or directory) you want to delete.
What happens if there are more levels?
Let's suppose the following directory hierarchy (as output by `tree -p`):

```
.
└── [dr-xr-xr-x]  alma
    └── [dr-xr-xr-x]  korte
        ├── [-r-xr-xr-x]  a.txt
        └── [drwxr-xr-x]  barack
            └── [-rw-rw-r--]  k.txt
```

What happens if we issue an `rm -rf alma` in the current directory?

```
$ rm -rf alma
/bin/rm: cannot remove 'alma/korte/a.txt': Permission denied
/bin/rm: cannot remove 'alma/korte/barack': Permission denied
```

And you end up with the following files after it is finished:

```
.
└── [dr-xr-xr-x]  alma
    └── [dr-xr-xr-x]  korte
        ├── [-r-xr-xr-x]  a.txt
        └── [drwxr-xr-x]  barack
```

What happened?

It sees that `alma` is not writable. So `korte` can't be deleted! Does it stop there? Guess what, it doesn't.
It starts going down the directory hierarchy. It sees that `korte` is not writable either so neither `a.txt` or
`barack` can be deleted as noted by the `Permission denied` messages.
This might already be confusing because `barack` is itself writable. But that only means  **its children** can't be deleted.
It, again, goes deeper. It finds `k.txt` inside `barack`. Since `barack` is writable, it can finally wreak some havoc and deletes `k.txt`.

So it ended up deleting a file 3 levels down from where we issued the command and left the rest intact.
"Obviously!"...

At least now I know.

The `-r` flag indicates that it should start descending into subdirectories. You have to add that flag if you start with a directory.
The `-f` flag makes it silent ("ignore nonexistent files and arguments, never prompt").
If you leave off the `-f` flag and do `rm -r alma` then it will ask: `descend into write-protected directory 'alma'?`
but leaving the -f off is not an option if you are running it from a script somewhere non-interactively.

Be careful with `rm`. Even without sudo.