---
layout:     post
title:      C++ adventures, part II. - What I want to do with it
date:       2023-09-22 10:30:00 +0100
categories: c++, programming, career
---

I'm tired of hearing myself say "I don't really know" when I'm asked why I want to work with a particular
piece of technology. I say that because even I don't have a clear
answer. Mostly it is just "because it seems interesting" but I rarely put more thought into it.
In this post I'll summarize why I want to learn C++ and what I want to do with that knowledge.

For years I've been becoming more and more interested in software that is running in the lower
layers of the computing stack. Networking software, operating systems and stuff that is running
between the OS and the hardware (one would be surprised to learn how much stuff there is actually,
I found it funny when people at [oxide][oxide] said something like "... and high level stuff like the OS kernel").
C/C++ were traditinally the typical tech for in such domains.

First of all, anything running close to the hardware is inherently interesting because the hardware is 
very interesting. It's intricate and yet tangible. You can hold a CPU in your hand, the circuitry is there.
Yet it is incomprehensible how much it can do an how fast it does it.
I also think these kinds of low level software have the longest lineages, they date back to times that I referred to
in [my earlier post][magic-of-computing] and so they seem a bit magical and invoke a sense of nostalgia in me.
Running at the bottom of the stack also means that they have to be very efficient (because many other layers rely
on them) which means the negligent and wasteful approach to software development that I've been part of all my
career is not going to cut it. I'de be more than happy to leave this path.

Besides the low level stuff, C/C++ are used in many areas of software that I find particularly
interesting as I wrote [in this post][into-cpp]. The embedded category in that list is especially
important because it connects (by way of running in / controlling machines)
to many domains outside of software that I'm very much attracted to:

- environmental issues / waste management
- geology, maps, cartography
- exploration (oceans, marine research, space exploration)
- agriculture, botany
- aviation (aerodynamics, aeroplanes)

So becoming proficient in C/C++ is not the goal, the goal is to be able to do interesting
and challenging work and do it for something that matters. I found C/C++ to be right at
that intersection.

I'm also excited about some modern alternatives to C/C++ that seem to be getting popular like
Rust and Zig but without proper C/C++ experience I'd never really understand the significance
of the advancements in these languages. For now, they'll have to wait.

[oxide]: https://oxide.computer/
[magic-of-computing]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2023-09-06-the-magic-of-computing %}
[into-cpp]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2020-05-18-into-cpp %}
